.. _maintenance-cli-tools:

==================
Command line tools
==================

There are a number of command line tools that can help you troubleshoot
various AtoM problems.

See below for :ref:`common-atom-queries`.

.. _cli-get-version:

Find out what version of AtoM you're running
============================================

You can always find out what version of AtoM you have installed via the
:term:`user interface` by navigating to **Admin > Settings > Global** - the
application version is the first thing listed on the Settings page. See:
:ref:`application-version` for more information.

However, if you'd like to check the application version from the
command-line, you can run the following command from AtoM's root folder:

.. code:: bash

   php symfony tools:get-version

.. _cli-add-superuser:

Add a SuperUser (Admin) account
===============================

You can create a new :term:`administrator` account from the command-line
using the following command:

.. code:: bash

   php symfony tools:add-superuser --email="youremail@example.com" --password="MYSUPERPASSWORD" <username>

The username should not have any spaces in it.

.. _cli-change-password:

Change a password
=================

If you need to change the password on a :term:`user account` in AtoM, you can
do so via the command-line.

.. code:: bash

   php symfony tools:reset-passwordsymfony tools:reset-password [--activate] username [password]

The :term:`username` is a required value, while the password is optional - if
no password is entered, AtoM will generate an 8-character temporary password
to be used for the user account. AtoM will return the new password in the
command-line.

.. warning::

   We strongly recommend that these auto-generated passwords ONLY be used
   temporarily! They are not strong passwords - users should generate longer
   passwords that include special characters. For more information, see:

   * `Wikipedia - Password strength <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Password_strength>`__
   * `Wikipedia - Password cracking <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Password_cracking>`__

If the user account is currently marked inactive in the system (see
:ref:`mark-user-inactive` for more information), you can also use the option
``--activate`` to mark that account as active again.

.. seealso::

   You can also manage user passwords through the :term:`user interface`. For
   more information, see:

   * :ref:`change-password`
   * :ref:`edit-user`

.. _cli-regenerate-derivatives:

Regenerating derivatives
========================

If you are upgrading to AtoM 2 from ICA-AtoM, the :term:`digital object`
derivatives (i.e. the :term:`reference display copy` and the
:term:`thumbnail` generated by AtoM when a :term:`master digital object` is
uploaded) are set to be a different default size (i.e. they are larger in
AtoM) - consequently, after an upgrade, derivatives from ICA-AtoM may appear
blurry or pixellated.

As well, sometimes the ``digitalobject:load`` task used for importing digital
objects to existing :term:`descriptions  <archival description>` (see:
:ref:`digital-object-load-task`) won't generate the :term:`thumbnail` and
reference images properly for digital objects that were loaded (e.g. due to a
crash or absence of convert installed, etc. - see under requirements,
:ref:`other-dependencies`). In this case, you can regenerate
these thumbsnail/reference images using the following command:

.. code:: bash

   php symfony digitalobject:regen-derivatives

.. WARNING::

   All of your current derivatives will be deleted! They will be replaced
   with new derivatives after the task has finished running. If you have
   manually changed the :term:`thumbnail` or :term:`reference display copy`
   of a digital object via the user interface (see:
   :ref:`edit-digital-object`), these two will be replaced with digital
   object derivatives created from the :term:`master digital object`.

.. _cli-re-index-pdf:

Re-indexing PDF text
====================

.. code:: bash

   php symfony digitalobject:extract-text

In rare situations you may want to to re-index all PDFs to make their text
searchable in AtoM without having to re-import them completely. This task
will go through each existing PDF imported into AtoM and re-index their
contents for searches.

.. _cli-rebuild-nested-set:

Rebuild the nested set
======================

AtoM generally uses a relational database to store its data (we recommend
MySQL). However, relational databases, which are comprised of flat tables,
are not particularly suited to handling hierarchical data. As developer
`Mike Hillyer <http://mikehillyer.com/articles/managing-hierarchical-data-in-mysql/>`__
notes, "Hierarchical data has a parent-child relationship that is not naturally
represented in a relational database table." One method of addressing this is
to employ a "Nested set model" (`Wikipedia <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nested_set_model>`__).
AtoM makes use of a nested set to manage hierarchical relationships, such as
between parent and child :term:`terms <term>` and
:term:`descriptions <archival description>`.

Sometimes, during operations that involve updates to large hierarchies, the
nested set can become corrupted - especially if the server times out during an
operation that reaches the execution limit settings. The following task will
rebuild all nested sets in AtoM:

.. code:: bash

   php symfony propel:build-nested-set

.. _cli-generate-slugs:

Generate slugs
==============

In some cases, AtoM may time out in the middle of an operation that involves
the creation of new records - for example, if a user attempts to import a
very large CSV file through the :term:`user interface` (rather than the
command-line - see: :ref:`csv-import`). In such cases, it is possible that
AtoM has died after creating an :term:`information object`, but before having
a chance to create a :term:`slug` for the record. This can cause unexpected
errors in the application - most notably, 500 errors when trying to access the
records missing slugs through the application interface.

If you want to generate slugs for records in AtoM without them, you can use
the following command:

.. code:: bash

   php symfony propel:generate-slugs

Note that existing slugs will **not** be replaced. If you want to generate
new slugs for existing objects, you will need to first delete the existing
slugs from the database. This can be useful for records in which a random
slug has been automatically assigned, because the default user data used to
generate the slug has not been provided (see :ref:`below <slugs-in-atom>`
for more information on how slugs are generated in AToM).

For information on deleting slugs from AtoM's database, see below in the
section on :ref:`common-atom-queries` - particularly, :ref:`sql-delete-slugs`.

.. SEEALSO::

   * :ref:`sql-truncate-slugs`

.. _slugs-in-atom:

Notes on slugs in AtoM
----------------------

A :term:`slug` is a word or sequence of words which make up the last part of a
URL in AtoM. It is the part of the URL that uniquely identifies the resource
and often is indicative of the name or title of the page (e.g.: in
*www.yourwebpage.com/about*, the slug is *about*). The slug is meant to
provide a unique, human-readable, permanent link to a resource.

In AtoM, all pages based on user data (such as :term:`archival descriptions
<archival description>`, :term:`archival institutions <archival institution>`,
:term:`authority records <authority record>`, :term:`terms <term>`, etc.) are
automatically assigned a slug based on the information entered into the
resource:

==================== =============================
Entity type          Slug derived from
==================== =============================
Archival description Title
Authority record     Authorized form of name
Accession            Identifier (accession number)
Other entities       Name
==================== =============================

Generated slugs will only allow digits, letters, and dashes. English articles
(such as "the," "a," "an," etc) are removed, and any other sequences of
unaccepted characters (e.g. accented or special characters, etc.) are replaced
with dashes. This conforms to general practice around slug creation - for example,
it is "common practice to make the slug all lowercase, accented characters are
usually replaced by letters from the English alphabet, punctuation marks are
generally removed, and long page titles should also be truncated to keep the
final URL to a reasonable length"
(`Wikipedia <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clean_URL#Slug>`__). In AtoM, slugs
are truncated to a maximum of 250 characters.

If a slug is already in use, AtoM will append a dash and an incremental number
(a numeric suffix) to the new slug - for example, if the slug "*correspondence*"
is already in use, the next record with a title of "Correspondence" will
receive the slug "*correspondence-2*".

If a record is created without data in the :term:`field` from which the slug
is normally derived (e.g. an :term:`archival description` created without a
title), AtoM will assign it a randomly generated alpha-numeric slug. Once
assigned, slugs cannot be changed through the :term:`user interface` - either
the record must be deleted and a new record created, or you must manipulate
the database directly.

Finally, :term:`static pages <static page>`, or permanent links, include a
slug :term:`field` option, but only slugs for new static pages can be edited
by users; the slugs for the default :term:`Home page` and :term:`About page`
in AtoM **cannot** be edited. New static page slugs can either be customized
by users or automatically generated by AtoM if the field is left blank; AtoM
will automatically generate a slug that is based on the "Title" you have
indicated for the new static page. For more information on static pages in
AtoM, see: :ref:`manage-static-pages`.

.. TIP::

   For developers interested in seeing the code where slugs are handled in
   AtoM, see ``/lib/model/QubitSlug.php``

.. _cli-normalize-taxonomy:

Taxonomy normalization
======================

A command-line tool will run through :term:`taxonomy` terms, consolidating
duplicate terms. If you've got two terms named "Vancouver" in the "Places"
taxonomy, for example, it will update term references to point to one of the
terms and will delete the others.

.. code:: bash

   php symfony taxonomy:normalize [--culture=<culture>] <taxonomy name>

The ``--culture`` option on this command-line tool is optional - the default
value, if none is entered is *en* (English). The value you
enter for <culture> should be the default culture of the terms you wish to
normalize - in most cases this will be the default culture you set up when
installing AtoM (though depending on your imports and multi-lingual use of the
application, this may not always be true) The value, if needed, should be
entered using two-letter ISO  639-1 language code values - for example,
"en" for English; "fr" for French,  "it" for Italian, etc.
See `Wikipedia <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_ISO_639-1_codes>`__ for a
full list of ISO 639-1 language codes.

The taxonomy name value should be entered as it is seen in the :term:`user
interface` in **Manage > Taxonomies**. This value is case sensitive. If the
taxonomy name has spaces (i.e. if it is more than one word), you will want to
use quotation marks.

Below is an example of running this command on French terms in the Physical
object type taxonomy:

.. code:: bash

   php symfony taxonomy:normalize --culture="fr" "Physical object type"

You might also run this command on English terms in the Places taxonomy like
so:

.. code:: bash

   php symfony taxonomy:normalize Places

.. _cli-update-publication-status:

Update the publication status of a description
==============================================

In AtoM, an :term:`archival description` can have :term:`publication status`
of either "Draft" or "Published". The publication status of a record, which
can be set to either :term:`draft <draft record>` or
:term:`published <published record>`, determines whether or not the associated
description is visible to unauthenticated (i.e., not logged in) users, such as
:term:`researchers <researcher>`. It can be changed via the
:term:`user interface` in the :term:`administration area` of a description's
:term:`edit page` by a user with edit permissions.
See :ref:`publish-archival-description` for instructions on changing this via
the user interface.

If you would like to change the publication status of a record via the
command-line, you can use the following command-line tool, run from the root
directory of AtoM. You will need to know the :term:`slug` of the description
whose publication status you wish to update:

.. code:: bash

   php symfony tools:update-publication-status [-f|--force] [-i|--ignore-descendants] [-y|--no-confirm] [-r|--repo] publicationStatusId slug

Notes on use
------------

To update a record to Draft or Published, you must supply a
publicationStatusID - that is, a fixed ID value in AtoM that represents
either Draft or Published. Entering the terms "draft" or "published" will not
work. Instead use the following values for the publicationStatusID:

================== ========
Publication status statusID
================== ========
Draft              159
Published          160
================== ========

**Example use (no options)** - update a description with a slug of
"example-description" to published:

.. code:: bash

   php symfony tools:update-publication-status 160 example-description

**Task options:**

In general and as in the user interface, if a parent description is updated,
it will also update the publication status of its children. In some rare
cases however, there may be legacy records in the system with a publication
status of NULL. The command-line option ``--force``, or ``-f`` for short, will
force the update of the target information object and all of its
:term:`children <child record>`, including legacy records that might have a
publication status of NULL. We recommend using this option any time you want
a publication status update to affect children as well.

The ``--ignore-descendents``, or ``-i``, option can be used to leave the
publication status of all :term:`children <child record>` unchanged. This is
useful if you have a mixture of publication statuses at lower levels - some
draft, and some published.

Normally when the command is run, AtoM will ask for a y/N confirmation before
proceeding. The ``--no-confirm`` or ``-y`` option was introduced so that
developers who are interested in using this task in a larger scripted action
can override the confirmation step.

If the ``--repo`` or ``-r`` option is used, AtoM will update the publication
status for **ALL** descriptions belonging to the associated
:term:`repository` (e.g. :term:`archival institution`). To use this option,
you must supply the :term:`slug` of the repository. An information object
slug must still be present for the task to execute, but it will be ignored,
and ALL descriptions belonging to the repository will be updated instead.

**Example use** - updating all the descriptions associated with "My archival
institution" (slug = "my-archival-institution") to published. Note I must
still provide a description slug ("my-description") for it to execute:

.. code:: bash

   php symfony tools:update-publication-status --force --repo="my-archival-institution" 160 my-description

.. WARNING::

   This task is NOT designed for scalability. If you are planning on updating
   the publication status of thousands of records, we recommend using SQL to
   do so instead. We have included instructions on how to do so below - see:

   * :ref:`sql-update-publication-status`
   * :ref:`sql-update-publication-status-repo`


.. _cli-delete-description:

Delete a description
====================

You can delete a description from the command-line if you know the
description's :term:`slug`. A slug is a word or sequence of words which make
up a part of a URL that  identifies a page in AtoM. It is the part of the URL
located at the end of the URL path and often is indicative of the name or
title of the page (e.g.: in  *www.youratom.com/this-description*, the slug
is *this-description*). When a new information object is created in AtoM,
the slug for that page is generated based on the title, with spaces,
stopwords, and special characters stripped out.

If you know the slug of a description you'd like to delete, use the following
command to delete it from the command-line:

.. code:: bash

   php symfony tools:delete-description <slug>

.. _cli-delete-drafts:

Delete all draft descriptions
=============================

If you want to remove all :term:`draft <draft record>` information object (e.g.
:term:`archival description`) records from AtoM, you can use the following
command-line tool to delete all records with a :term:`publication status` of
"Draft":

.. code:: bash

   php symfony tools:delete-drafts

The task will ask you to confirm the operation:

.. code:: bash

   >> delete-drafts Deleting all information objects marked as draft...
   Are you SURE you want to do this (y/n)?

Enter "y" if you are certain you would like to delete all draft records.

.. _cli-purge-data:

Purging all data
================

If you're working with an AtoM installation and want to, for whatever reason,
purge all data you can do this with a command-line tool:

.. code:: bash

   php symfony tools:purge

.. warning::

   This will delete ALL DATA in your AtoM instance! Be sure this is what you
   want to do before you proceed. You may want to back up your database first
   - see :ref:`below <cli-backup-db>`

The tool will prompt you for the title and description of your site as well as
for details needed to create a new admin user. If a ``.gitconfig`` file is present
in your home directory purge will use your name and email, from that file, to
provide default values.

.. _cli-backup-db:

Backing up the database
=======================

.. seealso::

   :ref:`maintenance-data-backup`

To back up a MySQL database, use the following command:

.. code:: bash

   mysqldump -u myusername -p mydbname > ./mybackupfile.sql

Be sure to use your username / password / database name. To restore
the database as it was during the dump command, you can suck it back in with
this command:

.. code:: bash

   mysql -u myusername -p mydbname < ./mybackupfile.sql

The database is now restored to the point when you dumped it.

.. _cli-bulk-import-xml:

Bulk import of XML files
========================

While XML files can be imported individually via the :term:`user interface`
(see: :ref:`import-descriptions-terms`), it may be desireable to import multiple
XML files, or large files (typically larger than 1 MB) through the command line.

.. code:: bash

   php symfony import:bulk /NAME-OF-FOLDER

.. _common-atom-queries:

============================
Common AtoM database queries
============================

Occasionally manually modifying the AtoM database is required, such as when
data gets corrupted from timeouts or other bugs. Here we will include a few
useful queries based on common actions users wish to perform on their
databases, which are not accommodated from the user interface. For all of
these, you will need to execute them from inside MySQL, using the username
and password you created during installation.

Assuming your username and pass are both set to "root", here is an example of
what you would type into the command-line:

.. code:: bash

   $ mysql -u root -p root

Once you've accessed the database, you can run SQL queries to manually modify
the AtoM database.

.. important::

   We strongly recommend that you back-up all of your data prior to
   manipulating the database! If possible, you should test the outcome on a
   cloned development instance of AtoM, rather than performing these actions
   on a production site without testing them in advance.


.. _sql-update-publication-status:

Update all draft archival descriptions to published
===================================================

Use this command to publish all draft descriptions in AtoM:

.. code:: bash

   UPDATE status SET status_id=160 WHERE type_id=158 AND object_id <> 1;


.. _sql-update-publication-status-repo:

Update all draft archival descriptions from a particular repository to published
================================================================================

First, retrieve the id of the repository from the slug. In this example, the
repository is at http://myatomsite.com/atom/index.php/my-test-repo

.. code:: bash

   SELECT object_id FROM slug WHERE slug='my-test-repo';

Assuming in this example the id returned is 123, you would then execute the
following query to perform the publication status updates:

.. code:: bash

   UPDATE status
     SET status_id=160
     WHERE type_id=158 AND status_id=159
     AND object_id IN (
       SELECT id FROM information_object
       WHERE repository_id=123
     );

Don't forget to rebuild the search index!

.. code:: bash

   php symfony search:populate

.. _sql-truncate-slugs:

Truncate slugs to maximum character length
==========================================

This command will truncate all :term:`slugs <slug>` to a specified maximum
character length. In the example below, the character length is 245.

.. code:: bash

   UPDATE slug SET slug = LEFT(slug, 245) WHERE LENGTH(slug) > 245;

.. _sql-delete-slugs:

Delete slugs from AtoM
======================

In some cases, you may wish to replace the existing :term:`slugs <slug>` in AtoM -
particularly if they have been randomly generated because the user-supplied
data from which the slug is normally derived (e.g. the "Title" field for an
:term:`archival description`) was not entered when the record was created.
For more information on how slugs are generated by AtoM, see above,
:ref:`slugs-in-atom`. If you have since supplied the relevant information
(e.g. added a title to your archival description), you may want to generate a
new slug for it that is more meaningful.

In such a case, you will need to delete the slug in AtoM's database first -
after which you can run the command-line task to generate slugs for those
without them (see above, :ref:`cli-generate-slugs`). AtoM slugs are
conveniently stored in a table named "slug" - if you know the slug you'd like
to delete, you can use the following command to delete it from AtoM's
database (replacing *your-slug-here* with the slug you'd like to delete):

.. code:: bash

   DELETE FROM slug WHERE slug='your-slug-here';

.. IMPORTANT::

   **Remember**, you will run into problems if you don't replace the slug!
   You can use the generate-slug task to do so; see
   :ref:`cli-generate-slugs`, above. Remember as well: if you are trying to
   replace a randomnly generated slug, but you haven't filled in the data
   field from which the slug is normally derived prior to deleting the old
   slug (see :ref:`above <slugs-in-atom>` for more on how slugs are generated
   in AtoM), you will end up with another randomly generated slug!

If you wanted to delete **all** slugs currently stored in AtoM, you could do
so with the following query:

.. code:: bash

   DELETE FROM slug;

.. WARNING::

   This is an extreme action, and it will delete **ALL** slugs, including
   custom slugs for your static pages. We strongly recommend backing up your
   database before attempting this - see above, :ref:`cli-backup-db`.

You can then use the generate-slugs task to generate new slugs:

.. code:: bash

   php symfony propel:generate-slugs

See :ref:`above <cli-generate-slugs>` for further documentation on this
command-line tool.

:ref:`Back to the top <maintenance-cli-tools>`
