.. _dev-env-compose:

==============
Docker Compose
==============

Linux containers and Docker are radically changing the way that applications
are developed, built, distributed and deployed. The AtoM team is experimenting
with new workflows that make use of containers. This document introduces our
new development workflow based on Docker and `Docker Compose <https://docs.docker.com/compose/>`__.
The latter is a tool that help us to run multi-container applications like AtoM
and it is suitable for both development and production environments.

.. WARNING::

   The Docker Compose integration and AtoM Dockerfile outlined here are intended
   for **testing and development purposes only**. They have not been fully
   tested and prepared for use in production environments at this time.

   If you encounter issues or bugs, you are welcome to report them via the
   `AtoM users forum <https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/ica-atom-users>`__
   - we will provide basic support as we are able, but urge you to proceed at
   your own risk.

If this is the first time that you have heard about containers you may find
`The New Stack eBook Series <http://thenewstack.io/ebookseries/>`_ a useful
resource to get up to speed quickly.


Install Docker and Docker Compose
=================================

Docker works the same whether you are using `Docker for Windows
<https://docs.docker.com/docker-for-windows/>`_, `Docker for Mac
<https://docs.docker.com/docker-for-mac/>`_ or Docker on Linux. For the latter,
make sure that both `Docker Engine
<https://docs.docker.com/engine/installation/>`_ and `Docker Compose
<https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/>`_  are installed following the
instructions in the links.

Spin it up
==========

Let's make sure that the Docker client can reach the engine. The following
command will list the currently running containers:

.. code-block:: bash

   docker ps

You should see an empty list. Now using git, check out the sources of AtoM and
change your current directory.

.. code-block:: bash

   git clone -b qa/2.6.x https://github.com/artefactual/atom.git atom
   cd atom

.. note::

   Clone the "stable/2.5.x" branch if you want to test the latest stable
   version of AtoM.

Now set the environment variable ``COMPOSE_FILE`` to tell Compose what is the
location of our YAML file. You could do the same using the ``-f`` flag but we
don't want to do so each time we invoke the ``docker-compose`` command.

.. code-block:: bash

   # For bash users (most of you)
   export COMPOSE_FILE="$PWD/docker/docker-compose.dev.yml"

   # For fish users
   set -lx COMPOSE_FILE (pwd)/docker/docker-compose.dev.yml

It's time to use Docker Compose in order to provision our containers:

.. code-block:: bash

   # Create and start containers. This may take a while the first time you run
   # it because all the images have to be downloaded (e.g. percona, memcached)
   # and the AtoM image has to be built.
   docker-compose up -d

   # Execute a command in the running container atom: purge database
   docker-compose exec atom php symfony tools:purge --demo

   # Execute another command: build stylesheets
   docker-compose exec atom make -C plugins/arDominionPlugin

.. TIP::

   While you wait, take the opportunity to check out our `Dockerfile <https://github.com/artefactual/atom/blob/stable/2.4.x/docker/Dockerfile>`__,
   which describes the steps that are taken to build the AtoM image. It is
   based on Alpine Linux (only 2 MB) + PHP7 and the rest of dependencies. In
   addition, our `docker-compose.dev.yml <https://github.com/artefactual/atom/blob/stable/2.4.x/docker/docker-compose.dev.yml>`__
   file shows how AtoM is orchestrated together with its service dependencies.
   It is an environment meant to be used by developers.

That's it! You have started the containers and put them in the background,
populated the database and compile the CSS stylesheet of the Dominion plugin.
You can start developing right away. Changes made in the source code will take
effect immediately.

Due to a bug that has not been solved yet, the AtoM worker needs to be
restarted after the database is populated for the first time:

.. code-block:: bash

   docker-compose restart atom_worker

.. IMPORTANT::

   To avoid reseting the configuration files to their default version each time
   the containers are created, the following files are only generated if they
   don't exist already in the source code:

   - apps/qubit/config/app.yml
   - apps/qubit/config/factories.yml
   - apps/qubit/config/settings.yml

Docker Compose lets you perform many different actions. Please refer to the
`documentation <https://docs.docker.com/compose/overview/>`_ for more help.
For example, you can monitor the output of some of your containers as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

   docker-compose logs -f atom atom_worker nginx

You can also scale the cluster as needed. In the following example we are going
to add extra AtoM workers and Elasticsearch nodes.

.. code-block:: bash

   docker-compose scale atom_worker=2 elasticsearch=3

Let's verify that the Elasticsearch cluster has indeed three nodes in place:

.. code-block:: bash

   docker-compose exec atom curl elasticsearch:9200/_cat/nodes

   cdec404af617 172.18.0.7 6 65 0.26 d m Huntara
   366a7817864f 172.18.0.3 5 65 0.26 d * Vance Astro
   0e52024208fe 172.18.0.6 4 65 0.26 d m Bloodstorm

You can also verify that two workers have subscribed to Gearman:

.. code-block:: bash

   # Establish a TCP connection to gearmand, port 4730
   docker-compose exec atom bash -c "nc gearmand 4730"

   # Send STATUS command
   STATUS

   fdd4764376d2f763-arGenerateFindingAidJob            0   0   2
   fdd4764376d2f763-arUpdatePublicationStatusJob       0   0   2
   fdd4764376d2f763-arInformationObjectCsvExportJob    0   0   2
   fdd4764376d2f763-arInheritRightsJob                 0   0   2

You could temporarily stop all the services with ``docker-compose stop`` (which
will need ``docker-compose up -d`` later to start the services again) or both
stop and remove related containers, networks, images and volumes by running:

.. code-block:: bash

   docker-compose down --volumes


Connect to AtoM
===============

AtoM should be now accessible from your browser. If you want to find the
address run the following:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ docker-compose ps

   Name                       Command               State             Ports
   -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   docker_atom_1            /atom/src/docker/entrypoin ...   Up
   docker_atom_worker_1     /atom/src/docker/entrypoin ...   Up
   docker_elasticsearch_1   /docker-entrypoint.sh bash ...   Up
   docker_gearmand_1        gearmand --queue-type=libm ...   Up
   docker_memcached_1       /entrypoint.sh -p 11211 -m ...   Up
   docker_nginx_1           nginx -g daemon off;             Up      192.168.64.2:8000->80/tcp
   docker_percona_1         /docker-entrypoint.sh mysqld     Up

As you can see in the right column, Nginx has published a TCP port. It may be
different in your environment. In this example, we will put the following
address in our browser: http://192.168.64.2:8000.

The default login details are:

* Username: ``demo@example.com``
* Password: ``demo``

Please be aware that this process is new and it may have some unknown issues.
Let us know if you have some feedback!

:ref:`Back to top <dev-env-compose>`
